ADR: Listener Operator (#256)
stackabletech/documentation: modules/contributor/pages/adr/ADR000-WIP.adoc

Listener describes well its functionality: It is listening for outside traffic. Also, the name is not taken in Kubernetes yet.

== Decision Outcome

There is only one design, which is already in its implementation.

Pros:

* There is little routing overhead (compared to proxying or similar).
* The listener-operator can be extended to support more ListenerClasses.
* It is a very low-friction solution that doesn't require a lot of permissions to set up.

Cons:

* The processes of some products like HDFS and Kafka assume that they are only reachable under one specific address. They cannot, for example, use one network for internal communication and a different network for external communication. This means that if outside access with the listener operator is configured, all traffic will be routed that way, also internal traffic that would not need to be routed out of the cluster.

> * It is another DaemonSet Operator, which means more stuff that is running. It is also not clear how we will get this certified with OpenShift.

Reviewer: This sounds bit less  passive aggressive to me:

```suggestion
* This operator is deployed as a `DaemonSet` , which means it adds a small amount of overhead on all nodes inside the cluster and consequently adds to the control plane's api server.
* Such an operator cannot be deployed using OpenShift's Operator Lifecycle Manager and consequently cannot be certified on that platform.
```

= How to provide out-of-cluster access for products with built-in routing

> Doc Writer <doc.writer@asciidoctor.org>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Felix Hennig <felix.hennig@stackable.tech>
```

v0.1, YYYY-MM-DD
:status: draft

* Status: {status}
* Deciders: [list everyone involved in the decision] <!-- optional -->
* Date: [YYYY-MM-DD when the decision was last updated] <!-- optional -->

Technical Story: [description | ticket/issue URL] <!-- optional -->

== Context and Problem Statement
// Describe the context and problem statement, e.g., in free form using two to three sentences. You may want to articulate the problem in form of a question.

> Some products like HDFS and Kafka don't use a single router or portal node to access the cluster, but have the client access multiple nodes. For example, HDFS name nodes will tell the client where data can be found (hostname/IP and port), the client is then expected to connect directly to a specific data node. Similarly for Kafka and topic shards.

Reviewer 2: Router/portal/ingress nodes must also be reachable _somehow_ by the user, and are also in-scope here.

Problem:

* In our current setup, there's no way to connect to a specific replica in a StatefulSet or Deployement.
* The hostname and IP that the pods know about themselves is from _inside_ the cluster. The IP only works inside the overlay network.

> * Clients might cache data locations that they received, and Kubernetes might move pods around. For some routing solutions, this can be a problem. (Stickiness)

Reviewer 2: I think static configuration files are a bigger issue than caching, even if they're both basically the same problem on different scales

Author: i've added static files into the text

== Decision Drivers
// Which criteria are useful to evaluate solutions?

* At least for HDFS, connections to individual pods will be used to transmit data, this means that performance is relevant.
* On-prem customers will often not have any kind of network-level load balancing (at least not one that is configurable by K8s).
* Cloud customers will often have relatively short-lived K8s nodes.
* The solution should be minimally invasive - no large setups required outside of the cluster.

== Implemented Solution

> There is a new lb-operator (name still not final) which runs as a DaemonSet and uses a CSI plugin to provide pseudo storage with files in it with information about the outside connection of the Pod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a new lb-operator (name still not final) which runs as a CSI driver to provide pseudo storage with files in it with information about how to connect to the Pod.
```

I think stickiness is also worth mentioning here, somehow.

Communication flow example using the HDFS Operator:

> - The HDFS Operator requests a PVC of the lb.stackable.tech type. In the annotations it can request the lb class (`nodeport`, `loadbalancer`), for this example it'll be the `nodeport` type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The HDFS Operator requests a PVC of the lb.stackable.tech type. In the annotations it can request the lb class (`nodeport`, `loadbalancer`), for this example it'll be the `nodeport` type.
```

The examples didn't do a great job here, ideally classes should be configured based on use case archetypes rather than how they're implemented. For example, you might define a `LoadBalancerClass/public` with `serviceType: NodePort` in an on-prem cluster, but with `serviceType: LoadBalancer` in GKE.

Author: clarified (hopefully)

- The lb operator provisions a NodePort Service for the volume request, which means a Service per Pod. It reads the NodePort IP and port.
- The lb operator provisions the volumes with files inside containing information about the pods outside address and port - The IP and port of the NodePort Service. Because of the PVC it knows which pod the volume will be mounted into, and can find out the NodePort that belongs to the pod.
- the operator already provisioned the pod with a script that read the files from the mounted volume into environment variables which are then read by HDFS. This part is product specific.

> The way the operator requests the volume is identical for all pods: it always requests a volume with the same type (i.e. `nodeport`).

Reviewer 2: No, this should be configurable by the `ProductCluster`.

Author: Added some clarification.

== Decision Outcome

There is only one design, which is already in its implementation.

Pros:

* There is little routing overhead (compared to proxying or similar).
* The lb operator can be extended to support more LoadBalancerClasses.
* It is a very low-friction solution that doesn't require a lot of permissions to set up.

Cons:

* Products like HDFS and Kafka only support having a single address. This means that if outside access with the lb operator is configured, all traffic will be routed that way.
* It is another DaemonSet Operator, which means more stuff that is running. It is also not clear how we will get this certified with OpenShift.

== Other notes

=== Spiked Alternative: MetalLB
See: https://metallb.universe.tf/

> SpikeLB is a bare metal load balancer that was spiked briefly. However it requires BGP integration, which is not feasible as a requirement for customer installations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MetalLB is a bare metal load balancer that was spiked briefly. However it requires BGP integration, which is not feasible as a requirement for customer installations.
```

Reviewer 2: Calico can also do this natively. Calico requires BGP integration, MetalLB can use either BGP or ARP.

With ARP, the `LoadBalancer`s appear as "real" IP addresses in the same subnet as the nodes (with no need to configure custom routing roules). However, this scales poorly (it assumes that all nodes are in the same L2 broadcast domain) and is relatively likely to be blocked by firewalls or network policy.

Author: Added.

= How to provide stable out-of-cluster access to products
Felix Hennig <felix.hennig@stackable.tech>
v0.1, YYYY-MM-DD
:status: draft

* Status: {status}
* Deciders: [list everyone involved in the decision] <!-- optional -->
* Date: [YYYY-MM-DD when the decision was last updated] <!-- optional -->

Technical Story: [description | ticket/issue URL] <!-- optional -->

> == Context and Problem Statement

Author: I have restructured that text a bit too, but I'm not sure if I made it clear enough. If you want to you can make a change suggestion too! You can use the little button with the + and - on it for that (sorry if you knew this already)

* **Replicas not addressable** - In our current setup, there's no way to connect to a specific replica in a StatefulSet or Deployement - which is necessary for cases like the data nodes of HDFS.
* **Pods don't know their outside address** - The hostname and IP that the pods know about themselves is from _inside_ the cluster. The IP only works inside the overlay network. This means ProductCluster processes cannot link to other nodes of the cluster.

== Decision Drivers
// Which criteria are useful to evaluate solutions?

* At least for HDFS, connections to individual pods will be used to transmit data, this means that performance is relevant.
* On-prem customers will often not have any kind of network-level load balancing (at least not one that is configurable by K8s).
* Cloud customers will often have relatively short-lived K8s nodes.
* The solution should be minimally invasive - no large setups required outside of the cluster.

> 

Author: Hey, good point. I've added a section and a note, I hope this is better. I wasn't involved in the Spike of the alternatives, I can't say much more to it - for me the "the dependencies are too heavy" was enough :smile: 

This is also in the decision outcome - our solution doesn't require external dependencies. Is the restructuring sufficient?

The structure here is a bit different than in other ADRs because the implementation and spiking of other solution happened already months ago and this ADR is sort of written after the fact.

> 

Reviewer 3: Ah yes, I almost forgot that this ADR is "from the future". The restructuring looks great. It fills in the story gap nicely.

== Implemented Solution

> 

Reviewer 3: Is this a good place to leave a note on how the name 'listener' was chosen?

Author: Added a section on it

A new resource is proposed: Listener. It is handled similarly to storage. There is are ListenerClasses for different types of Listeners - analogous to StorageClass. There are Listener objects - similar to PersistentVolumes. And claims to listeners are made in ProductCluster objects.

> Under the hood a listener-operator runs as a CSI driver with a new `listener.stackable.tech` type. Listener claims in the ProductCluster resource are then converted by the product operator into PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs) to the storage type. Listener settings are passed along as annotations to the PVC. Initially there will be two Listener types - `private` implemented with NodePorts; and `public` implemented with LoadBalancers. The listener-operator creates the Listeners according to the PVC settings and provides the listener info in the PV into the pods with the PVCs.

Reviewer 3: It's part of the communication flow example below, but explaining how an external client would reach the service after the PVC business is done could help. I'm not entirely sure I understand this part yet to be honest.

Author: I have added a paragraph to the end of the section to explain this - let me know if this is good

Reviewer 3: Great! I like how the information is easy to spot now 👍

* The listener-operator provisions a NodePort Service for the volume request, which means a Service per Pod. It reads the NodePort IP and port.
* The listener-operator provisions the volumes with files inside containing information about the pods outside address and port - The IP and port of the NodePort Service. Because of the PVC it knows which pod the volume will be mounted into, and can find out the NodePort that belongs to the pod.
* the HDFS operator already provisioned the pod with a script that read the files from the mounted volume into environment variables which are then read by HDFS. This part is product specific.

The way the product operator requests the volume is identical for all pods of a StatefulSet/Deployment: it always requests a volume with the type (i.e. `nodeport`) that was configured in the ProductCluster.

== Decision Outcome

There is only one design, which is already in its implementation.

Pros:

* There is little routing overhead (compared to proxying or similar).
* The listener-operator can be extended to support more ListenerClasses.
* It is a very low-friction solution that doesn't require a lot of permissions to set up.

Cons:

> * Products like HDFS and Kafka only support having a single address. This means that if outside access with the lb operator is configured, all traffic will be routed that way.

Reviewer 3: I'm missing understanding of HDFS and Kafka to really understand this sentence. Could some additional explanations help here?

Author: Ah, yes that's not well explained, clarified it now!

== Context and Problem Statement
// Describe the context and problem statement, e.g., in free form using two to three sentences. You may want to articulate the problem in form of a question.

> Some products like HDFS and Kafka don't use a single router or portal node to access the cluster, but have the client access multiple nodes. For example, HDFS name nodes will tele data can be found (hostname/IP and port), the client is then expected to connect directly to a specific data node. Similarly for Kafka and topic shards.

Reviewer 2: Tele?

Author: not sure what happened there :D
